# The Greenhouse Gas Protocol proposes to oversimplify corporations and the grid and ignores billions
Robert Letzler

January 20, 2026

The Greenhouse Gas Protocol proposes to “clarify that scope 2 must only include emissions from electricity generation processes that are physically connected to the reporter’s value chain…”  This emphasis misses the complexity of energy value chains and precludes crediting investments that help some of the world’s most vulnerable people. It does so without acknowledgment, thus foreclosing debate.  

Deliverability provides a desirable floor by preventing matching of green generation from clean, rapidly-decarbonizing grids to loads in dirty, difficult-to-decarbonize grids.  It is also an undesirable ceiling that excludes projects that could realize synergies with other corporate goals, ignores potential investments in dirtier grids that serve billions of vulnerable people and often pose extra political or economic risks.  Deliverability gives loads no options if local green power projects are infeasible because of long interconnection queues or intransigent institutions  

Complex value chains can produce renewable electricity distant from a corporation’s major loads.  For example, Ford has a partnership with SunRun to bundle electric vehicles, chargers, and solar installations.  Many companies sell technologies – from smart thermostats to electric vehicles to networked screens-- with the potential to manage distributed energy resources at customer locations far from their corporate loads.  Even purely financial arrangements can add to value chains.  Southwest Airlines famously hedged against fuel price volatility by trading crude oil futures and, according to its website, secured “Lower fuel costs \[that\] allowed Southwest to expand its fleet by 149 aircraft while adding new routes and jobs.” It added to its value chain without taking delivery of a barrel of crude oil.  


<a name="lnk">

National and multinational companies have diverse sets of customers and employees covering vast geographies.  The business literature reports that advocates for corporate energy action “must tailor their strategies to the strengths and inclinations of the targeted corporations” ([Chatterji and Richman, 2008](https://journals.law.harvard.edu/lpr/wp-content/uploads/sites/89/2013/05/2.1_2_Chatterji.pdf)). Similarly [Carroll and Shabhana](https://hummedia.manchester.ac.uk/faculty/pg-offer-holders/management/reading-lists/business-case-for-corporate-social-responsibility.pdf) write, “Only when firms are able to pursue \[corporate social responsibility (CSR)\] activities with the support of their stakeholders can there be a market for virtue and a business case for CSR.”  Smith observes that ‘\[A\] company’s reputation and the value of its brand…are among its most valuable assets’ ([2005, p. 60](https://www.proquest.com/docview/220757741?sourcetype=Trade%20Journals)).  Greenhouse gas accounting could measure the emissions benefits of green energy projects that have other benefits for corporations, potentially including:

* Offering cleaner air to vulnerable workers and customers,  
* Providing more reliable electricity, creating other business opportunities   
* harnessing the corporation’s strengths potentially including credit worthiness, sophistication in capital project management, or ability to choose among competing regions to solve persistent challenges?    
* bolstering their reputation in their most competitive or newest markets, their hometown, or the region where it competes hardest for talent?  

The GHG protocol revisions support such investments only if the project was also electrically connected to a correspondingly large load.  As far as the value chain and deliverability arguments are concerned, a corporation can claim credit for clean generation primarily where its electric arc furnaces, air separation units, aluminum smelters, cold storage warehouses, data centers, or other major loads are.  In many cases, these electricity intensive facilities are located not at the heart of a company’s operations, but where the cheap electricity, raw materials, or major customers were decades ago.  Big technology firms serve billions of customers around the world with PC and mobile operating systems and apps, but Google does not have [cloud data centers](https://cloud.google.com/sustainability/region-carbon) in six of the 10 [most populous countries](https://worldpopulationreview.com/countries).  The GHG protocol revisions offer no scope 2 incentives for it to invest in green power in those countries.

Reducing the value chain to, basically, the electric arc furnace or the data center, renders billions of vulnerable people invisible and precludes smart business decisions without the requisite acknowledgment, articulation of criteria, justification, or discussion.  We can put the global back in global warming and acknowledge the merit of capitalizing high value projects without throwing the doors open to every possible project.  The current approach hides its sweep using simplistic discussions of value chains.  It sidelines many valuable investments as “broader impact claims reported separately.” In this case, “separate” is “inferior” regardless of whether the separate reporting is under scope 2 AMI or scope 3\.  The new AMI standard is being developed more slowly than revisions to the established scope 2 standard. Many companies see incentives to take their scope 2 emissions to zero but not their scope 3 emissions.  The proposed GHG standards weakens incentives for many useful efforts.

There is a win-win alternative:  measure megawatts and emissions, count investments in any dirtier grid and hour and then let the corporate decision makers and the public have the hard conversations about which projects are worthy and appropriate.
